# References from "Exploring Collaboration Patterns and Strategies in Human-AI Co-creation through the Lens of Agency"

Zhang, S., Wang, H., & Yi, X. (2025). arXiv:2507.06000v1 [cs.HC]

---

[1] Ajith Abraham, Aboul-Ella Hassanien, and Vaclav Snášel. 2009. Computational social network analysis: Trends, tools and research advances. (2009).

[2] Iyadunni J Adenuga and Jonathan E Dodge. 2024. Agency Flow in a Multi-user Ridesharing System. In Companion Publication of the 2024 Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 336–341.

[3] Pär J Ågerfalk. 2020. Artificial intelligence as digital agency. European Journal of Information Systems 29, 1 (2020), 1–8.

[4] Leah Ajmani, Logan Stapleton, Mo Houtti, and Stevie Chancellor. 2024. Data Agency Theory: A Precise Theory of Justice for AI Applications. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 631–641.

[5] Lea Albaugh, Scott E Hudson, and Lining Yao. 2023. An Augmented Knitting Machine for Operational Assistance and Guided Improvisation. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15.

[6] Shm Garanganao Almeda, JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Kyu Won Kim, Pradeep Mani Rathnam, and Bjoern Hartmann. 2024. Prompting for discovery: Flexible sense-making for ai art-making with dreamsheets. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[7] Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Adam Fourney, Besmira Nushi, Penny Collisson, Jina Suh, Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N Bennett, Kori Inkpen, et al. 2019. Guidelines for human-AI interaction. In Proceedings of the 2019 chi conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–13.

[8] Nisha Anthraper, Prachee Javiya, Sai Iluru, Lujie Karen Chen, and Andrea Kleinsmith. 2024. PeerConnect: Co-Designing a PeerMentoring Support System with Computing Transfer Students. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–7.

[9] Riku Arakawa, Hiromu Yakura, and Masataka Goto. 2023. CatAlyst: domain-extensible intervention for preventing task procrastination using large generative models. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.

[10] Zahra Ashktorab, Casey Dugan, James Johnson, Qian Pan, Wei Zhang, Sadhana Kumaravel, and Murray Campbell. 2021. Effects of communication directionality and AI agent differences in human-AI interaction. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–15.

[11] Amid Ayobi, Jacob Hughes, Christopher J Duckworth, Jakub J Dylag, Sam James, Paul Marshall, Matthew Guy, Anitha Kumaran, Adriane Chapman, Michael Boniface, et al. 2023. Computational notebooks as co-design tools: engaging young adults living with diabetes, family carers, and clinicians with machine learning models. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–20.

[12] Hannah K Bako, Alisha Varma, Anuoluwapo Faboro, Mahreen Haider, Favour Nerrise, Bissaka Kenah, John P Dickerson, and Leilani Battle. 2023. User-driven support for visualization prototyping in D3. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 958–972.

[13] Paulo Bala, Pedro Sanches, Vanessa Cesário, Sarah Leão, Catarina Rodrigues, Nuno Jardim Nunes, and Valentina Nisi. 2023. Towards Critical Heritage in the wild: Analysing Discomfort through Collaborative Autoethnography. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.

[14] Valentin Bauer, Tommaso Padovano, Mattia Gianotti, Giacomo Caslini, and Franca Garzotto. 2024. MusicTraces: A collaborative music and paint activity for autistic people. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–7.

[15] Yasmine Belghith, Atefeh Mahdavi Goloujeh, Brian Magerko, Duri Long, Tom Mcklin, and Jessica Roberts. 2024. Testing, Socializing, Exploring: Characterizing Middle Schoolers' Approaches to and Conceptions of ChatGPT. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[16] Jesse Josua Benjamin, Heidi Biggs, Arne Berger, Julija Rukanskaite, Michael B Heidt, Nick Merrill, James Pierce, and Joseph Lindley. 2023. The entoptic field camera as metaphor-driven research-through-design with AI technologies. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.

[17] Dan Bennett, Oussama Metatla, Anne Roudaut, and Elisa D Mekler. 2023. How does HCI understand human agency and autonomy?. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–18.

[18] Arngeir Berge, Frode Guribye, Siri-Linn Schmidt Fotland, Gro Fonnes, Ingrid H Johansen, and Christoph Trattner. 2023. Designing for control in nurse-ai collaboration during emergency medical calls. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 1339–1352.

[19] Tao Bi, Yiyi Zhang, Chongyang Wang, and Amid Ayobi. 2019. Characterizing HCI research in China: Streams, methodologies and future directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.08915 (2019).

[20] Agnieszka Billewicz. 2018. Silly Lamp: Study of a Relationship with Engaging Machine Learning Artefacts. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6.

[21] Filip Bircanin, Margot Brereton, Laurianne Sitbon, Bernd Ploderer, Andrew Azaabanye Bayor, and Stewart Koplick. 2021. Including adults with severe intellectual disabilities in co-design through active support. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12.

[22] Margaret A Boden. 1998. Creativity and artificial intelligence. Artificial intelligence 103, 1-2 (1998), 347–356.

[23] Nico Brand, William Odom, and Samuel Barnett. 2023. Envisioning and understanding orientations to introspective AI: Exploring a design space with Meta. Aware. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–18.

[24] Petter Bae Brandtzaeg, Yukun You, Xi Wang, and Yucong Lao. 2023. "Good" and "bad" machine agency in the context of human-AI communication: The case of ChatGPT. In International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 3–23.

[25] Michael E Bratman. 2013. Shared agency: A planning theory of acting together. Oxford University Press.

[26] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101.

[27] Tara Capel and Margot Brereton. 2023. What is human-centered about human-centered AI? A map of the research landscape. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–23.

[28] Stuart K Card. 2018. The psychology of human-computer interaction. Crc Press.

[29] Tuhin Chakrabarty, Philippe Laban, Divyansh Agarwal, Smaranda Muresan, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2024. Art or artifice? large language models and the false promise of creativity. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–34.

[30] Minsuk Chang, John Joon Young Chung, Katy Ilonka Gero, Ting-Hao Kenneth Huang, Dongyeop Kang, Vipul Raheja, Sarah Sterman, and Thiemo Wambsganss. 2024. Dark Sides: Envisioning, Understanding, and Preventing Harmful Effects of Writing Assistants-The Third Workshop on Intelligent and Interactive Writing Assistants. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6.

[31] Michael Alan Chang, Richmond Y Wong, Thomas Breideband, Thomas M Philip, Ashieda McKoy, Arturo Cortez, and Sidney K D'Mello. 2024. Co-design partners as transformative learners: Imagining ideal technology for schools by centering speculative relationships. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15.

[32] Ruijia Cheng, Alison Smith-Renner, Ke Zhang, Joel R Tetreault, and Alejandro Jaimes. 2022. Mapping the design space of human-ai interaction in text summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14863 (2022).

[33] EunJeong Cheon and Norman Makoto Su. 2017. Configuring the User: " Robots have Needs Too". In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 191–206.

[34] EunJeong Cheon, Cristina Zaga, Hee Rin Lee, Maria Luce Lupetti, Lynn Dombrowski, and Malte F Jung. 2021. Human-machine partnerships in the future of work: exploring the role of emerging technologies in future workplaces. In Companion Publication of the 2021 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 323–326.

[35] Yoonseo Choi, Eun Jeong Kang, Min Kyung Lee, and Juho Kim. 2023. Creator-friendly algorithms: Behaviors, challenges, and design opportunities in algorithmic platforms. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–22.

[36] John Joon Young Chung. 2022. Artistic user expressions in AI-powered creativity support tools. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–4.

[37] Caroline Claisse, Abigail C Durrant, and Mabel Lie. 2024. Understanding Antenatal Care Needs through Co-Creation with Roma Women to Inform the Design of mHealth Technologies. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16.

[38] Simon Colton and Geraint A Wiggins. 2012. Computational creativity: The final frontier? In ECAI 2012. IOS Press, 21–26.

[39] Patricia Cornelio, Patrick Haggard, Kasper Hornbaek, Orestis Georgiou, Joanna Bergström, Sriram Subramanian, and Marianna Obrist. 2022. The sense of agency in emerging technologies for human–computer integration: A review. Frontiers in Neuroscience 16 (2022), 949138.

[40] Michele Cremaschi, Max Dorfmann, and Antonella De Angeli. 2024. A Steampunk Critique of Machine Learning Acceleration. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 246–257.

[41] Jessica Dai. 2024. POSITION: beyond personhood: agency, accountability, and the limits of anthropomorphic ethical analysis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.

[42] Hai Dang, Karim Benharrak, Florian Lehmann, and Daniel Buschek. 2022. Beyond text generation: Supporting writers with continuous automatic text summaries. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–13.

[43] Nicholas Davis, Chih-PIn Hsiao, Kunwar Yashraj Singh, Lisa Li, and Brian Magerko. 2016. Empirically studying participatory sensemaking in abstract drawing with a co-creative cognitive agent. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 196–207.

[44] Fabio de Almeida and Sónia Rafael. 2024. Bias by Default.: Neocolonial Visual Vocabularies in AI Image Generating Design Practices.. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–8.

[45] Paramveer S Dhillon, Somayeh Molaei, Jiaqi Li, Maximilian Golub, Shaochun Zheng, and Lionel Peter Robert. 2024. Shaping Human-AI Collaboration: Varied Scaffolding Levels in Co-writing with Language Models. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–18.

[46] Zijian Ding and Joel Chan. 2023. Mapping the Design Space of Interactions in Human-AI Text Co-creation Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06430 (2023).

[47] John J Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson. 2018. A review of user interface design for interactive machine learning. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS) 8, 2 (2018), 1–37.

[48] Abigail Durrant, Duncan Rowland, David S Kirk, Steve Benford, Joel E Fischer, and Derek McAuley. 2011. Automics: souvenir generating photoware for theme parks. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1767–1776.

[49] Passant Elagroudy, Jie Li, Kaisa Väänänen, Paul Lukowicz, Hiroshi Ishii, Wendy E Mackay, Elizabeth F Churchill, Anicia Peters, Antti Oulasvirta, Rui Prada, et al. 2024. Transforming HCI Research Cycles using Generative AI and "Large Whatever Models"(LWMs). In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–5.

[50] Marc Eulerich, Aida Sanatizadeh, Hamid Vakilzadeh, and David A Wood. 2023. Can artificial intelligence pass accounting certification exams? ChatGPT: CPA, CMA, CIA, and EA. Social Science Research Network (2023). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4452175

[51] Xianzhe Fan, Zihan Wu, Chun Yu, Fenggui Rao, Weinan Shi, and Teng Tu. 2024. ContextCam: Bridging Context Awareness with Creative Human-AI Image Co-Creation. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[52] Tira Nur Fitria. 2023. Artificial intelligence (AI) technology in OpenAI ChatGPT application: A review of ChatGPT in writing English essay, In ELT Forum: Journal of English Language Teaching. ELT Forum: Journal of English Language Teaching 12, 1, 44–58. https://doi.org/10.15294/elt.v12i1.64069

[53] Luciano Floridi. 2014. The fourth revolution: How the infosphere is reshaping human reality. OUP Oxford.

[54] Kenneth D Forbus. 1984. Qualitative process theory. Artificial intelligence 24, 1-3 (1984), 85–168.

[55] Yue Fu, Sami Foell, Xuhai Xu, and Alexis Hiniker. 2024. From Text to Self: Users' Perception of AIMC Tools on Interpersonal Communication and Self. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[56] Zhiyong Fu and Yuyao Zhou. 2020. Research on human–AI co-creation based on reflective design practice. CCF Transactions on Pervasive Computing and Interaction 2 (2020), 33–41.

[57] Jie Gao, Kenny Tsu Wei Choo, Junming Cao, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Simon Perrault. 2023. CoAIcoder: Examining the Effectiveness of AI-assisted Human-to-Human Collaboration in Qualitative Analysis. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 31, 1, Article 6 (Nov. 2023), 38 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3617362

[58] Jie Gao, Simret Araya Gebreegziabher, Kenny Tsu Wei Choo, Toby Jia-Jun Li, Simon Tangi Perrault, and Thomas W Malone. 2024. A Taxonomy for Human-LLM Interaction Modes: An Initial Exploration. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–11.

[59] Simret Araya Gebreegziabher, Zheng Zhang, Xiaohang Tang, Yihao Meng, Elena L Glassman, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2023. Patat: Human-ai collaborative qualitative coding with explainable interactive rule synthesis. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.

[60] Frederic Gmeiner, Humphrey Yang, Lining Yao, Kenneth Holstein, and Nikolas Martelaro. 2023. Exploring challenges and opportunities to support designers in learning to co-create with AI-based manufacturing design tools. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–20.

[61] Ken Gu, Madeleine Grunde-McLaughlin, Andrew McNutt, Jeffrey Heer, and Tim Althoff. 2024. How do data analysts respond to ai assistance? a wizard-of-oz study. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–22.

[62] Alicia Guo, Pat Pataranutaporn, and Pattie Maes. 2024. Exploring the impact of AI value alignment in collaborative ideation: Effects on perception, ownership, and output. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–11.

[63] Xinyu Guo, Yi Xiao, Jiaqi Wang, and Tie Ji. 2023. Rethinking designer agency: A case study of co-creation between designers and AI. (2023).

[64] Ariel Han, Xiaofei Zhou, Zhenyao Cai, Shenshen Han, Richard Ko, Seth Corrigan, and Kylie A Peppler. 2024. Teachers, Parents, and Students' perspectives on Integrating Generative AI into Elementary Literacy Education. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[65] Qingyang He, Weicheng Zheng, Hanxi Bao, Ruiqi Chen, and Xin Tong. 2023. Exploring designers' perceptions and practices of collaborating with generative AI as a co-creative agent in a multi-stakeholder design process: Take the domain of avatar design as an example. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Symposium of Chinese CHI. 596–613.

[66] Lena Hegemann, Yue Jiang, Joon Gi Shin, Yi-Chi Liao, Markku Laine, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2023. Computational Assistance for User Interface Design: Smarter Generation and Evaluation of Design Ideas. In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–5.

[67] Rania Hodhod and Brian Magerko. 2016. Closing the cognitive gap between humans and interactive narrative agents using shared mental models. In Proceedings of the 21st international conference on intelligent user interfaces. 135–146.

[68] Steffen Holter and Mennatallah El-Assady. 2024. Deconstructing Human-AI Collaboration: Agency, Interaction, and Adaptation. In Computer Graphics forum, Vol. 43. Wiley Online Library, e15107.

[69] Matt-Heun Hong, Lauren A Marsh, Jessica L Feuston, Janet Ruppert, Jed R Brubaker, and Danielle Albers Szafir. 2022. Scholastic: Graphical human-AI collaboration for inductive and interpretive text analysis. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–12.

[70] Md Naimul Hoque, Tasfia Mashiat, Bhavya Ghai, Cecilia D Shelton, Fanny Chevalier, Kari Kraus, and Niklas Elmqvist. 2024. The HaLLMark Effect: Supporting Provenance and Transparent Use of Large Language Models in Writing with Interactive Visualization. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15.

[71] Eric Horvitz. 1999. Principles of mixed-initiative user interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 159–166.

[72] Yongquan'Owen' Hu, Jingyu Tang, Xinya Gong, Zhongyi Zhou, Shuning Zhang, Don Samitha Elvitigala, Florian'Floyd' Mueller, Wen Hu, and Aaron J Quigley. 2025. Vision-Based Multimodal Interfaces: A Survey and Taxonomy for Enhanced Context-Aware System Design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13443 (2025).

[73] Angel Hsing-Chi Hwang. 2022. Too late to be creative? AI-empowered tools in creative processes. In CHI conference on human factors in computing systems extended abstracts. 1–9.

[74] Nanna Inie, Jeanette Falk, and Steve Tanimoto. 2023. Designing participatory ai: Creative professionals' worries and expectations about generative ai. In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–8.

[75] Gaurav Jain, Basel Hindi, Connor Courtien, Xin Yi Therese Xu, Conrad Wyrick, Michael Malcolm, and Brian A Smith. 2023. Front row: Automatically generating immersive audio representations of tennis broadcasts for blind viewers. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–17.

[76] Ellen Jiang, Kristen Olson, Edwin Toh, Alejandra Molina, Aaron Donsbach, Michael Terry, and Carrie J Cai. 2022. Promptmaker: Prompt-based prototyping with large language models. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts. 1–8.

[77] Mirabelle Jones, Christina Neumayer, and Irina Shklovski. 2023. Embodying the algorithm: exploring relationships with large language models through artistic performance. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–24.

[78] Shuli Jones, Isabella Pedraza Pineros, Daniel Hajas, Jonathan Zong, and Arvind Satyanarayan. 2024. "Customization is Key": Reconfigurable Textual Tokens for Accessible Data Visualizations. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.

[79] Martin Jonsson and Jakob Tholander. 2022. Cracking the code: Co-coding with AI in creative programming education. In Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Creativity and Cognition. 5–14.

[80] Just Think AI. 2024. Human-AI Co-Creation: Collaborative creation processes between humans and AI. Webpage. Accessed on 2025-04-03. URL not provided in the source image..

[81] Mitt Nowshade Kabir. [n. d.]. Unleashing Human Potential: A Framework for Augmenting Co-Creation with Generative AI. In Proceedings of the International Conference on AI Research. Academic Conferences and publishing limited.

[82] Kowe Kadoma, Marianne Aubin Le Quere, Xiyu Jenny Fu, Christin Munsch, Danaë Metaxa, and Mor Naaman. 2024. The Role of Inclusion, Control, and Ownership in Workplace AI-Mediated Communication. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–10.

[83] Zeynep Ülkü Kahveci. 2023. Attribution problem of generative AI: a view from US copyright law. Journal of Intellectual Property Law and Practice 18, 11 (2023), 796–807. https://doi.org/10.1093/jiplp/jpad076

[84] Purnima Kamath, Fabio Morreale, Priambudi Lintang Bagaskara, Yize Wei, and Suranga Nanayakkara. 2024. Sound Designer-Generative AI Interactions: Towards Designing Creative Support Tools for Professional Sound Designers. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[85] Sol Kang and William Odom. 2024. On the Design of Quologue: Uncovering Opportunities and Challenges with Generative AI as a Resource for Creating a Self-Morphing E-book Metadata Archive. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16.

[86] Rilla Khaled, Mark J Nelson, and Pippin Barr. 2013. Design metaphors for procedural content generation in games. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1509–1518.

[87] Taenyun Kim, Maria D Molina, Minjin Rheu, Emily S Zhan, and Wei Peng. 2023. One AI does not fit all: A cluster analysis of the laypeople's perception of AI roles. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–20.

[88] Tomas Lawton, Francisco J Ibarrola, Dan Ventura, and Kazjon Grace. 2023. Drawing with reframer: Emergence and control in co-creative ai. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 264–277.

[89] Amanda Lazar, Jessica L Feuston, Caroline Edasis, and Anne Marie Piper. 2018. Making as expression: Informing design with people with complex communication needs through art therapy. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–16.

[90] Jungeun Lee, Suwon Yoon, Kyoosik Lee, Eunae Jeong, Jae-Eun Cho, Wonjeong Park, Dongsun Yim, and Inseok Hwang. 2024. Open Sesame? Open Salami! Personalizing Vocabulary Assessment-Intervention for Children via Pervasive Profiling and Bespoke Storybook Generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–32.

[91] John D Lee and Katrina A See. 2004. Trust in automation: Designing for appropriate reliance. Human factors 46, 1 (2004), 50–80.

[92] Mina Lee, Katy Ilonka Gero, John Joon Young Chung, Simon Buckingham Shum, Vipul Raheja, Hua Shen, Subhashini Venugopalan, Thiemo Wambsganss, David Zhou, Emad A Alghamdi, et al. 2024. A Design Space for Intelligent and Interactive Writing Assistants. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–35.

[93] Seo-young Lee, Matthew Law, and Guy Hoffman. 2024. When and How to Use AI in the Design Process? Implications for Human-AI Design Collaboration. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction (2024), 1–16.

[94] Joanne Leong, Pat Pataranutaporn, Valdemar Danry, Florian Perteneder, Yaoli Mao, and Pattie Maes. 2024. Putting things into context: Generative AI-enabled context personalization for vocabulary learning improves learning motivation. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15.

[95] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks (NIPS '20). Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 793, 16 pages.

[96] Franklin Mingzhe Li, Lotus Zhang, Maryam Bandukda, Abigale Stangl, Kristen Shinohara, Leah Findlater, and Patrick Carrington. 2023. Understanding visual arts experiences of blind people. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–21.

[97] Jingyi Li, Eric Rawn, Jacob Ritchie, Jasper Tran O'Leary, and Sean Follmer. 2023. Beyond the artifact: power as a lens for creativity support tools. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–15.

[98] Yinmiao Li, Jennifer Nwogu, Amanda Buddemeyer, Jaemarie Solyst, Jina Lee, Erin Walker, Amy Ogan, and Angela EB Stewart. 2023. "I Want to Be Unique From Other Robots": Positioning Girls as Co-creators of Social Robots in Culturally-Responsive Computing Education. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.

[99] Q Vera Liao, Yi-Chia Wang, Timothy Bickmore, Pascale Fung, Jonathan Grudin, Zhou Yu, and Michelle Zhou. 2019. Human-agent communication: Connecting research and development in HCI and AI. In Companion Publication of the 2019 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 122–126.

[100] Hannah Limerick, David Coyle, and James W Moore. 2014. The experience of agency in human-computer interactions: a review. Frontiers in human neuroscience 8 (2014), 643. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00643

[101] Phoebe Lin and Jessica Van Brummelen. 2021. Engaging teachers to co-design integrated AI curriculum for K-12 classrooms. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–12.

[102] Pei-Ying Lin, Kristina Andersen, Ralf Schmidt, Sanne Schoenmakers, Hèrm Hofmeyer, Pieter Pauwels, and Wijnand IJsselsteijn. 2024. Text-to-Image AI as a Catalyst for Semantic Convergence in Creative Collaborations. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 2753–2767.

[103] Christian List and Philip Pettit. 2011. Group agency: The possibility, design, and status of corporate agents. Oxford University Press.

[104] Bingjie Liu. 2021. In AI we trust? Effects of agency locus and transparency on uncertainty reduction in human–AI interaction. Journal of computer-mediated communication 26, 6 (2021), 384–402.

[105] Di Liu, Hanqing Zhou, and Pengcheng An. 2024. " When He Feels Cold, He Goes to the Seahorse"—Blending Generative AI into Multimaterial Storymaking for Family Expressive Arts Therapy. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–21.

[106] Vivian Liu, Han Qiao, and Lydia Chilton. 2022. Opal: Multimodal image generation for news illustration. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–17.

[107] Yiren Liu, Si Chen, Haocong Cheng, Mengxia Yu, Xiao Ran, Andrew Mo, Yiliu Tang, and Yun Huang. 2024. CoQuest: Exploring Research Question Co-Creation with an LLM-based Agent. In 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sytems, CHI 2024. Association for Computing Machinery, 17.

[108] Yiren Liu, Si Chen, Haocong Cheng, Mengxia Yu, Xiao Ran, Andrew Mo, Yiliu Tang, and Yun Huang. 2024. How ai processing delays foster creativity: Exploring research question co-creation with an llm-based agent. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–25.

[109] Ryan Louie, Andy Coenen, Cheng Zhi Huang, Michael Terry, and Carrie J Cai. 2020. Novice-AI music co-creation via AI-steering tools for deep generative models. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–13.

[110] Ryan Louie, Jesse Engel, and Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang. 2022. Expressive communication: Evaluating developments in generative models and steering interfaces for music creation. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 405–417.

[111] Yuwen Lu, Chengzhi Zhang, Iris Zhang, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2022. Bridging the Gap between UX Practitioners' work practices and AI-enabled design support tools. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts. 1–7.

[112] Kai Lukoff, Ulrik Lyngs, Himanshu Zade, J Vera Liao, James Choi, Kaiyue Fan, Sean A Munson, and Alexis Hiniker. 2021. How the design of youtube influences user sense of agency. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[113] Yao Lyu, He Zhang, Shuo Niu, and Jie Cai. 2024. A Preliminary Exploration of YouTubers' Use of Generative-AI in Content Creation. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–7.

[114] Wookjae Maeng and Joonhwan Lee. 2022. Designing and evaluating a chatbot for survivors of image-based sexual abuse. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–21.

[115] Atefeh Mahdavi Goloujeh, Anne Sullivan, and Brian Magerko. 2024. Is It AI or Is It Me? Understanding Users' Prompt Journey with Text-to-Image Generative AI Tools. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13.

[116] Elena Márquez Segura, Laia Turmo Vidal, Asreen Rostami, and Annika Waern. 2016. Embodied sketching. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 6014–6027.

[117] Jon McCormack, Toby Gifford, Patrick Hutchings, Maria Teresa Llano Rodriguez, Matthew Yee-King, and Mark d'Inverno. 2019. In a silent way: Communication between ai and improvising musicians beyond sound. In Proceedings of the 2019 chi conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–11.

[118] Hannah Nicole Mieczkowski. 2022. AI-Mediated Communication: Examining Agency, Ownership, Expertise, and Roles of AI Systems. Stanford University.

[119] Martin Miernicki and Irene Ng. 2021. Artificial intelligence and moral rights. Ai & Society 36, 1 (2021), 319–329. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-01027-6

[120] Arthur I Miller. 2019. The artist in the machine: The world of AI-powered creativity. Mit Press.

[121] Ashlee Milton, Leah Ajmani, Michael Ann DeVito, and Stevie Chancellor. 2023. "I see me here": Mental health content, community, and algorithmic curation on TikTok. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–17.

[122] Piotr Mirowski, Kory W Mathewson, Jaylen Pittman, and Richard Evans. 2023. Co-writing screenplays and theatre scripts with language models: Evaluation by industry professionals. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–34.

[123] Catalin Mitelut, Benjamin Smith, and Peter Vamplew. 2024. Position: intent-aligned AI systems must optimize for agency preservation. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.

[124] Caterina Moruzzi and Solange Margarido. 2024. A user-centered framework for human-ai co-creativity. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–9.

[125] Henrik Mucha, Dennis Mevißen, Sebastian Robert, Ricarda Jacobi, Kirsten Meyer, Winfried Heusler, and Daniel Arztmann. 2020. Co-design futures for AI and space: A workbook sprint. In Extended abstracts of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–8.

[126] Florian Floyd Mueller, Pedro Lopes, Paul Strohmeier, Wendy Ju, Caitlyn Seim, Martin Weigel, Suranga Nanayakkara, Marianna Obrist, Zhuying Li, Joseph Delfa, et al. 2020. Next steps for human-computer integration. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–15.

[127] J. Murray and A. Williamson. 2024. WHAT'S IN A SPELLCHECKER: ARE WE SIMPLY WITNESSING THE NEXT EPOCH IN TOOLS FOR SUPPORTING LEARNING?. In EDULEARN24 Proceedings (Palma, Spain) (16th International Conference on Education and New Learning Technologies). IATED, 5076–5084. https://doi.org/10.21125/edulearn.2024.1244

[128] Timothy Neate, Abi Roper, Stephanie Wilson, and Jane Marshall. 2019. Empowering expression for users with aphasia through constrained creativity. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–12.

[129] Michele Newman, Kaiwen Sun, Ilena B Dalla Gasperina, Grace Y Shin, Matthew Kyle Pedraja, Ritesh Kanchi, Maia B Song, Rannie Li, Jin Ha Lee, and Jason Yip. 2024. " I want it to talk like Darth Vader": Helping Children Construct Creative Self-Efficacy with Generative AI. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–18.

[130] Hiroyuki Osone, Jun-Li Lu, and Yoichi Ochiai. 2021. BunCho: ai supported story co-creation via unsupervised multitask learning to increase writers' creativity in japanese. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–10.

[131] Elisabeth Pacherie. 2007. The sense of control and the sense of agency. Psyche 13, 1 (2007), 1–30.

[132] So Yeon Park and Sang Won Lee. 2023. Why "why"? the importance of communicating rationales for edits in collaborative writing. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–25.

[133] Olga Pavlova and Andrii Kuzmin. 2024. Analysis of artificial intelligence based systems for automated generation of digital content. Khmnu.edu.ua (2024). https://elar.khmnu.edu.ua/items/cb57cdbe-03d5-49fe-aa5b-23c84dfff51c

[134] Coimbatore K Prahalad and Venkat Ramaswamy. 2004. Co-creating unique value with customers. Strategy & leadership 32, 3 (2004), 4–9.

[135] Pragathi Praveena, Bengisu Cagiltay, Michael Gleicher, and Bilge Mutlu. 2023. Exploring the use of collaborative robots in cinematography. In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6.

[136] Werner Rammert. 2008. Where the action is. distributed agency between humans, machines, and programs. transcript.

[137] Samantha Reig, Erica Principe Cruz, Melissa M Powers, Jennifer He, Timothy Chong, Yu Jiang Tham, Sven Kratz, Ava Robinson, Brian A Smith, Rajan Vaish, et al. 2023. Supporting piggybacked co-located leisure activities via augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15.

[138] Anna Marie Rezk, Auste Simkute, Ewa Luger, John Vines, Chris Elsden, Michael Evans, and Rhianne Jones. 2024. Agency Aspirations: Understanding Users' Preferences And Perceptions Of Their Role In Personalised News Curation. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16.

[139] Jeba Rezwana and Mary Lou Maher. 2022. Understanding user perceptions, collaborative experience and user engagement in different human-AI interaction designs for co-creative systems. In Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Creativity and Cognition. 38–48.

[140] Jeba Rezwana and Mary Lou Maher. 2023. Designing creative AI partners with COFI: A framework for modeling interaction in human-AI co-creative systems. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 30, 5 (2023), 1–28.

[141] Stuart J Russell and Peter Norvig. 2016. Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. pearson.

[142] Hervé Saint-Louis. 2021. Machine-human interaction: a paradigm shift?. In Human-Computer Interaction. Theory, Methods and Tools: Thematic Area, HCI 2021, Held as Part of the 23rd HCI International Conference, HCII 2021, Virtual Event, July 24–29, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 23. Springer, 123–136.

[143] Adriana Salatino, Arthur Prével, Emilie Caspar, and Salvatore Lo Bue. 2025. Influence of AI behavior on human moral decisions, agency, and responsibility. Scientific Reports 15, 1 (2025), 12329.

[144] Markus Schlosser. 2015. Agency. (2015).

[145] John R Searle. 1980. Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral and brain sciences 3, 3 (1980), 417–424.

[146] Orit Shaer, Angelora Cooper, Osnat Mokryn, Andrew L Kun, and Hagit Ben Shoshan. 2024. AI-Augmented Brainwriting: Investigating the use of LLMs in group ideation. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[147] Ashish Sharma, Sudha Rao, Chris Brockett, Akanksha Malhotra, Nebojsa Jojic, and William B Dolan. 2024. Investigating Agency of LLMs in Human-AI Collaboration Tasks. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 1968–1987.

[148] Nikhil Sharma, Q Vera Liao, and Ziang Xiao. 2024. Generative echo chamber? effect of llm-powered search systems on diverse information seeking. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[149] Vishal Sharma, Kirsten Bray, Neha Kumar, and Rebecca E Grinter. 2023. It takes (at least) two: The work to make romance work. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[150] Renee Shelby, Shalaleh Rismani, and Negar Rostamzadeh. 2024. Generative AI in Creative Practice: ML-Artist Folk Theories of T2I Use, Harm, and Harm-Reduction. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[151] Junxiao Shen, Boyin Yang, John J Dudley, and Per Ola Kristensson. 2022. Kwickchat: A multi-turn dialogue system for aac using context-aware sentence generation by bag-of-keywords. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 853–867.

[152] Jingyu Shi, Rahul Jain, Hyungjun Doh, Ryo Suzuki, and Karthik Ramani. 2023. An HCI-centric survey and taxonomy of humangenerative-AI interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07127 (2023).

[153] Yang Shi, Nan Cao, Xiaojuan Ma, Siji Chen, and Pei Liu. 2020. EmoG: supporting the sketching of emotional expressions for storyboarding. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–12.

[154] Antonette Shibani, Simon Knight, Kirsty Kitto, Ajanie Karunanayake, and Simon Buckingham Shum. 2024. Untangling critical interaction with AI in students' written assessment. In Extended abstracts of the CHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6.

[155] Ben Shneiderman. 2022. Human-centered AI. Oxford University Press.

[156] Ben Shneiderman and Pattie Maes. 1997. Direct manipulation vs. interface agents. interactions 4, 6 (1997), 42–61.

[157] Ben Shneiderman and Catherine Plaisant. 2010. Designing the user interface: strategies for effective human-computer interaction. Pearson Education India.

[158] Ellen Simpson and Bryan Semaan. 2023. Rethinking creative labor: A sociotechnical examination of creativity & creative work on TikTok. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16.

[159] Jose Luis Soler-Dominguez, Samuel Navas-Medrano, and Patricia Pons. 2024. Arcadia: A gamified mixed reality system for emotional regulation and self-compassion. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[160] Franchesca Spektor, Sarah E Fox, Ezra Awumey, Ben Begleiter, Chinmay Kulkarni, Betsy Stringam, Christine A Riordan, Hye Jin Rho, Hunter Akridge, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2023. Charting the automation of hospitality: an interdisciplinary literature review examining the evolution of frontline service work in the face of algorithmic management. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 7, CSCW1 (2023), 1–20.

[161] Lucille Alice Suchman. 1987. Plans and situated actions: The problem of human-machine communication. Cambridge university press.

[162] Minhyang Suh, Emily Youngblom, Michael Terry, and Carrie J Cai. 2021. AI as social glue: uncovering the roles of deep generative AI during social music composition. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–11.

[163] Sangho Suh, Meng Chen, Bryan Min, Toby Jia-Jun Li, and Haijun Xia. 2024. Luminate: Structured Generation and Exploration of Design Space with Large Language Models for Human-AI Co-Creation. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–26.

[164] Jingjing Sun, Jingyi Yang, Guyue Zhou, Yucheng Jin, and Jiangtao Gong. 2024. Understanding Human-AI Collaboration in Music Therapy Through Co-Design with Therapists. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–21.

[165] Lu Sun, Stone Tao, Junjie Hu, and Steven P Dow. 2024. MetaWriter: Exploring the Potential and Perils of AI Writing Support in Scientific Peer Review. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 8, CSCW1 (2024), 1–32.

[166] Yuan Sun, Eunchae Jang, Fenglong Ma, and Ting Wang. 2024. Generative AI in the Wild: Prospects, Challenges, and Strategies. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16.

[167] S Shyam Sundar. 2020. Rise of Machine Agency: A Framework for Studying the Psychology of Human–AI Interaction (HAII). Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 25, 1 (01 2020), 74–88. https://doi.org/10.1093/jcmc/zmz026

[168] Matthis Synofzik, Gottfried Vosgerau, and Albert Newen. 2008. Beyond the comparator model: a multifactorial two-step account of agency. Consciousness and cognition 17, 1 (2008), 219–239.

[169] Leila Takayama. 2015. Telepresence and apparent agency in human–robot interaction. The handbook of the psychology of communication technology (2015), 160–175.

[170] Min Tang, Sebastian Hofreiter, Christian H. Werner, Aleksandra Zielińska, and Maciej Karwowski. [n. d.]. "Who" Is the Best Creative Thinking Partner? An Experimental Investigation of Human–Human, Human–Internet, and Human–AI Co-Creation. The Journal of Creative Behavior n/a, n/a ([n. d.]). https://doi.org/10.1002/jocb.1519 arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/jocb.1519

[171] Jakob Tholander and Martin Jonsson. 2023. Design ideation with AI-sketching, thinking and talking with generative machine learning models. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM designing interactive systems conference. 1930–1940.

[172] Milka Trajkova, Duri Long, Manoj Deshpande, Andrea Knowlton, and Brian Magerko. 2024. Exploring Collaborative Movement Improvisation Towards the Design of LuminAI—a Co-Creative AI Dance Partner. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–22.

[173] Andrea C Tricco, Erin Lillie, Wasifa Zarin, Kelly K O'Brien, Heather Colquhoun, Danielle Levac, David Moher, Micah DJ Peters, Tanya Horsley, Laura Weeks, et al. 2018. PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation. Annals of internal medicine 169, 7 (2018), 467–473.

[174] Mark Turner. 2006. The artful mind: Cognitive science and the riddle of human creativity. Oxford University Press.

[175] Rama Adithya Varanasi, Nicola Dell, and Aditya Vashistha. 2024. Saharaline: A Collective Social Support Intervention for Teachers in Low-Income Indian Schools. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–20.

[176] Rama Adithya Varanasi and Nitesh Goyal. 2023. "It is currently hodgepodge": Examining AI/ML Practitioners' Challenges during Co-production of Responsible AI Values. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–17.

[177] Craig Vear, Adrian Hazzard, Solomiya Moroz, and Johann Benerradi. 2024. Jess+: AI and robotics with inclusive music-making. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.

[178] Mathias Peter Verheijden and Mathias Funk. 2023. Collaborative diffusion: Boosting designerly co-creation with generative AI. In Extended abstracts of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–8.

[179] Shikha Verma. 2019. Weapons of math destruction: how big data increases inequality and threatens democracy. Vikalpa 44, 2 (2019), 97–98.

[180] Thomas Serban Von Davier. 2023. Designing for Appreciation: How Digital Spaces Can Support Art and Culture. In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–5.

[181] Shaun Wallace. 2022. Asynchronous Collaboration Systems for Evolving Information. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts. 1–5.

[182] Qian Wan, Xin Feng, Yining Bei, Zhiqi Gao, and Zhicong Lu. 2024. Metamorpheus: Interactive, Affective, and Creative Dream Narration Through Metaphorical Visual Storytelling. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16.

[183] Bryan Wang, Yuliang Li, Zhaoyang Lv, Haijun Xia, Yan Xu, and Raj Sodhi. 2024. LAVE: LLM-powered agent assistance and language augmentation for video editing. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 699–714.

[184] Ge Wang, Jun Zhao, Max Van Kleek, and Nigel Shadbolt. 2023. 'Treat me as your friend, not a number in your database': Co-designing with Children to Cope with Datafication Online. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–21.

[185] Huanchen Wang, Minzhu Zhao, Wanyang Hu, Yuxin Ma, and Zhicong Lu. 2024. Critical heritage studies as a lens to understand short video sharing of intangible cultural heritage on douyin. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–21.

[186] Zhijie Wang, Yuheng Huang, Da Song, Lei Ma, and Tianyi Zhang. 2024. PromptCharm: Text-to-Image Generation through Multi-modal Prompting and Refinement. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI '24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 185, 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642803

[187] Zijie J Wang, Chinmay Kulkarni, Lauren Wilcox, Michael Terry, and Michael Madaio. 2024. Farsight: Fostering Responsible AI Awareness During AI Application Prototyping. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–40.

[188] Daniel M Wegner. 2003. The mind's best trick: How we experience conscious will. Trends in cognitive sciences 7, 2 (2003), 65–69.

[189] Justin D Weisz, Jessica He, Michael Muller, Gabriela Hoefer, Rachel Miles, and Werner Geyer. 2024. Design principles for generative AI applications. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–22.

[190] Justin D Weisz, Michael Muller, Jessica He, and Stephanie Houde. 2023. Toward general design principles for generative AI applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05578 (2023).

[191] Justin D Weisz, Michael Muller, Steven I Ross, Fernando Martinez, Stephanie Houde, Mayank Agarwal, Kartik Talamadupula, and John T Richards. 2022. Better together? an evaluation of ai-supported code translation. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 369–391.

[192] Norbert Wiener. 2019. Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. MIT press.

[193] Tongshuang Wu, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai. 2022. Ai chains: Transparent and controllable human-ai interaction by chaining large language model prompts. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–22.

[194] Zhuohao Wu, Danwen Ji, Kaiwen Yu, Xianxu Zeng, Dingming Wu, and Mohammad Shidujaman. 2021. AI creativity and the human-AI co-creation model. In Human-Computer Interaction. Theory, Methods and Tools: Thematic Area, HCI 2021, Held as Part of the 23rd HCI International Conference, HCII 2021, Virtual Event, July 24–29, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 23. Springer, 171–190.

[195] Daijin Yang, Yanpeng Zhou, Zhiyuan Zhang, Toby Jia-Jun Li, and Ray LC. 2022. AI as an Active Writer: Interaction strategies with generated text in human-AI collaborative fiction writing. In Joint Proceedings of the ACM IUI Workshops, Vol. 10. CEUR-WS Team, 1–11.

[196] Kexin Bella Yang, Vanessa Echeverria, Zijing Lu, Hongyu Mao, Kenneth Holstein, Nikol Rummel, and Vincent Aleven. 2023. Pair-up: prototyping human-AI co-orchestration of dynamic transitions between individual and collaborative learning in the classroom. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–17.

[197] Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, and Daphne Ippolito. 2022. Wordcraft: story writing with large language models. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 841–852.

[198] Marielba Zacarias and José Valente Oliveira. 2012. Human-computer interaction: the agency perspective. Springer.

[199] Chao Zhang, Xuechen Liu, Katherine Ziska, Soobin Jeon, Chi-Lin Yu, and Ying Xu. 2024. Mathemyths: leveraging large language models to teach mathematical language through Child-AI co-creative storytelling. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–23.

[200] Mingyuan Zhang, Zhaolin Cheng, Sheung Ting Ramona Shiu, Jiacheng Liang, Cong Fang, Zhengtao Ma, Le Fang, and Stephen Jia Wang. 2023. Towards Human-Centred AI-Co-Creation: A Three-Level Framework for Effective Collaboration between Human and AI. In Companion Publication of the 2023 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 312–316.

[201] Minfan Zhang, Daniel Ehrmann, Mjaye Mazwi, Danny Eytan, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Fanny Chevalier. 2022. Get to the point! Problem-based curated data views to augment care for critically ill patients. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13.

[202] Qiaoning Zhang, Matthew L Lee, and Scott Carter. 2022. You complete me: Human-ai teams and complementary expertise. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–28.

[203] Shuning Zhang, Xin Yi, Shixuan Li, Chuye Hong, Gujun Chen, Jiarui Liu, Xueyang Wang, Yongquan Hu, Yuntao Wang, and Hewu Li. 2025. Actual Achieved Gain and Optimal Perceived Gain: Modeling Human Take-over Decisions Towards Automated Vehicles' Suggestions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06179 (2025).

[204] Zheng Zhang, Jie Gao, Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2023. Visar: A human-ai argumentative writing assistant with visual programming and rapid draft prototyping. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–30.

[205] Zheng Zhang, Ying Xu, Yanhao Wang, Bingsheng Yao, Daniel Ritchie, Tongshuang Wu, Mo Yu, Dakuo Wang, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2022. Storybuddy: A human-ai collaborative chatbot for parent-child interactive storytelling with flexible parental involvement. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–21.

[206] Chengbo Zheng, Kangyu Yuan, Bingcan Guo, Reza Hadi Mogavi, Zhenhui Peng, Shuai Ma, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2024. Charting the Future of AI in Project-Based Learning: A Co-Design Exploration with Students. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.

[207] Feng Zhou, Steven D Benford, Sarah Whatley, Kate Marsh, Ian Ashcroft, Tanja Erhart, Welly O'Brien, and Paul Tennent. 2023. Beyond skin deep: Generative co-design for aesthetic prosthetics. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.

[208] Jiayi Zhou, Renzhong Li, Junxiu Tang, Tan Tang, Haotian Li, Weiwei Cui, and Yingcai Wu. 2024. Understanding nonlinear collaboration between human and AI agents: A co-design framework for creative design. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16.

[209] Jichen Zhu, Antonios Liapis, Sebastian Risi, Rafael Bidarra, and G Michael Youngblood. 2018. Explainable AI for designers: A humancentered perspective on mixed-initiative co-creation. In 2018 IEEE conference on computational intelligence and games (CIG). IEEE, 1–8.

[210] Jonathan Zong, Isabella Pedraza Pineros, Mengzhu Chen, Daniel Hajas, and Arvind Satyanarayan. 2024. Umwelt: Accessible Structured Editing of Multi-Modal Data Representations. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–20.
